SUBJECT: National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA)

References: See Enclosure 1

1. PURPOSE. Under the authorities vested in the Secretary of Defense by title 10, United States Code (U.S.C.) and title 50, U.S.C. (References (a) and (b)), and pursuant to DoD Directive (DoDD) 5143.01 (Reference (c)), this Directive reissues DoDD 5105.60 (Reference (d)) to update the mission, organization and management, responsibilities and functions, relationships, authorities, and administration of NGA. This Directive shall be interpreted consistent with law, policy, and directive, including, as applicable, those related to the Director of National Intelligence (DNI).

2. APPLICABILITY. This Directive applies to OSD, the Military Departments, the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff, the Combatant Commands, the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (hereafter referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”). The term “Military Services,” as used herein, refers to the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps.

3. DEFINITIONS. See Glossary.

4. MISSION. NGA shall support U.S. national security objectives by providing timely, relevant, and accurate geospatial intelligence (GEOINT) to the Department of Defense, the Intelligence Community (IC), and other U.S. Government (USG) departments and agencies; conducting other intelligence-related activities essential for U.S. national security; providing GEOINT for safety of navigation information; preparing and distributing maps, charts, books, and geodetic products; designing, developing, operating, and maintaining systems related to the processing and dissemination of GEOINT; and providing GEOINT in support of the combat objectives of the Armed Forces of the United States. The mission of NGA includes the responsibilities and functions contained herein.

a. NGA is a Defense Agency. The Secretary of Defense exercises authority, direction, and control over NGA, pursuant to References (a) and (b), and other applicable authorities. The Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) exercises authority, direction, and control on behalf of the Secretary of Defense over the Director, NGA, pursuant to Reference (c) and the responsibilities and authorities of the Secretary of Defense in References (a), (b), and (c).

b. NGA is designated a Combat Support Agency of the Department of Defense, pursuant to Reference (a). NGA also has significant national missions under section 404e of Reference (b) and Executive Order (E.O.) 12333 (Reference (e)).

c. NGA shall consist of a Director and such subordinate organizational elements as the Director establishes within the resources assigned by the Secretary of Defense or the DNI, as appropriate. The Director, if a military officer, shall carry the grade of lieutenant general or vice admiral.

d. Intelligence produced by NGA with substantive military value shall be submitted directly to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and, as appropriate, to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the DNI with notification to the USD(I), pursuant to Reference (c).

e. NGA is also an element of the IC, subject to the oversight of the DNI, pursuant to References (b) and (e). The DNI provides objectives, priorities, and guidance for, determines requirements and the budget of, and exercises execution, transfer, and reprogramming authorities over the National Intelligence Program (NIP) portion of the NGA budget. The DNI also exercises National Intelligence tasking and oversight; certain authorities for personnel, acquisition management, security, information technology, education, and training; oversight of intelligence coordination with foreign governments and international organizations; and other applicable authorities over NGA, pursuant to References (b) and (e). The Director, NGA, shall assist the Secretary of Defense and the DNI in their respective responsibilities to manage, develop, and ensure implementation of policies, principles, standards, and guidelines for the security of information systems that support the operations under their respective control, as well as support the operations of other USG departments and agencies with national security information. The Director, NGA, shall keep the USD(I) fully informed of all National Intelligence activities undertaken by NGA that are tasked by the DNI.

6. RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS. The Director, NGA, under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I), serves as the principal advisor to the Secretary of Defense, the Secretaries of the Military Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Combatant Commanders, and leaders of other USG departments and agencies on GEOINT. The Director, NGA, serves as the DoD GEOINT Manager, conducting all GEOINT activities delegated under the authorities of the Secretary of Defense and the USD(I). The Director, NGA, shall also advise the DNI and the Director of Defense Intelligence (DDI) – as established in the Secretary of Defense and DNI Memorandum of Agreement (Reference (f)) – on all matters under the purview of the DNI concerning GEOINT and serves as the GEOINT Functional Manager,

pursuant to Reference (e), and is responsible for leading and providing guidance to the National System for Geospatial Intelligence (NSG). The DDI will advise the DNI on critical deficiencies and strengths in GEOINT-related Defense Intelligence capabilities after consultation with the Director, NGA, and provide assessments on the effect of such deficiencies and strengths in meeting National Intelligence objectives. In the exercise of these responsibilities, the Director, NGA, shall plan, organize, direct, and manage NGA and all assigned resources to provide peacetime, contingency, crisis, and combat GEOINT support to the operational military forces of the United States. The Director, NGA, shall develop and manage those Military Intelligence Program (MIP) resources and capabilities under the purview of NGA. The Director, NGA, shall also plan and provide for survival, recovery, and reconstitution of NGA mission-essential functions, pursuant to DoDD 3020.26 (Reference (g)) and DoD Instruction (DoDI) 3020.39 (Reference (h)). The Director, NGA, shall:

# a. GEOINT

(1) Provide responsive GEOINT products, support, services, and information. Lead planning, prioritization of validated collection requirements, tasking, as appropriate (including national and tactical), collection, processing, exploitation, and dissemination to the DoD Components, the IC, the National Security Council, other USG departments and agencies, and foreign governments, as appropriate.

(2) Across the NSG, manage GEOINT planning, collection, operations, analysis, production, and dissemination, as well as lead unified GEOINT operations to assess, align, and execute GEOINT analysis and production.

(3) Establish and/or consolidate DoD geospatial data collection requirements and, as appropriate, task or coordinate collection with the DoD Components to collect and provide these data.

(4) Review and respond to GEOINT requirements and priorities for military operations in support of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Combatant Commanders, pursuant to Secretary of Defense Memorandum and Defense Intelligence Operations Coordination Center Execute Order (References (i) and (j)).

(5) Review and validate the national reconnaissance GEOINT requirements and priorities for national customers, and develop and submit to the DNI a consolidated statement of GEOINT requirements and priorities, pursuant to policies and procedures established by the DNI.

(6) Manage tasking of GEOINT collection operations, pursuant to References (a), (b), (e), and Director of Central Intelligence Directive (DCID) 1/8 (Reference (k)) as follows:

(a) Develop and consolidate GEOINT collection requirements for the NSG.

(b) Support GEOINT requirements of other USG departments and agencies.

(c) Task, as appropriate, DoD GEOINT collection elements to meet National Intelligence requirements and priorities as established by the Secretary of Defense and the DNI, consistent with Reference (j).

(d) Provide advisory tasking of theater assets to the Defense Intelligence Operations Coordination Center (DIOCC) for GEOINT collection to meet National Intelligence requirements, pursuant to Reference (j).

(e) In coordination with the DIOCC and the National Intelligence Coordination Center, determine when overriding National Intelligence requirements can only be met by assets assigned to, or under the operational control of, a Combatant Command or a Military Service component command under a Combatant Commander. In this instance, coordinate with the Commander, U.S. Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM), via the DIOCC to obtain Secretary of Defense approval to allocate theater or Service-assigned collection assets to National Intelligence collection requirements.

(f) Plan and execute the transfer of National Intelligence tasking authority, pursuant to DoDD S-3325.2 (Reference (l)).

(7) Serve as the DoD Lead for all acquisition or exchange of commercial and/or foreign government-owned imagery-related remote sensing data for the DoD Components. Coordinate such purchases by other USG departments and agencies, on request. Exercise disclosure and release of any classified information used in conjunction with unclassified imagery or information. Execute the responsibilities assigned under National Security Presidential Directive 27 (Reference (m)).

(8) Serve as the DoD representative to the United States Board on Geographic Names, as established in the Memorandum of Understanding between the United States Board on Geographic Names and the Defense Mapping Agency (Reference (n)).

(9) Provide for Safety of Navigation, pursuant to Reference (a) and the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (Reference (o)).

(10) Disseminate and facilitate sharing of GEOINT by the most efficient and expeditious means consistent with DoDD 8320.02 (Reference (p)), and DoD and Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) security and information sharing policies and procedures.

(11) Design and manage NGA programs and activities to improve standards of performance, economy, and efficiency.

(12) Serve as the DoD Lead for Terrain Environment Modeling and Simulation, coordinating with DoD modeling and simulation activities related to the geospatial aspects of natural and man-made features across the environmental domains of Earth, the atmosphere, and near-Earth space, pursuant to DoDD 5000.59 (Reference (q)).

(13) Execute disclosure and release responsibilities as authorized by National Disclosure Policy – 1 (Reference (r)).

(14) Formulate, coordinate, and implement policy for the classification, control, disclosure, and release of GEOINT for the NSG, pursuant to DNI guidance.

(15) Develop and submit to the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff a consolidated statement of GEOINT production requirements and priorities, pursuant to the National Defense Strategy and Guidance for Development of the Force (GDF) for FY2010-2015 (References (s) and (t)).

(16) Protect intelligence sources and methods from unauthorized disclosure, pursuant to guidance received from the Secretary of Defense and the DNI, as well as References (b), (e), and DoDI 5030.59 (Reference (u)), and E.O. 12958 (Reference (v)).

(17) Identify and analyze the industrial base, as appropriate, to meet essential national GEOINT requirements and to ensure industrial base impacts on NGA functions are considered. Assess the applicability of evolving U.S. and foreign commercial capabilities to meet GEOINT needs in support of national security objectives.

(18) Maintain the capability to conduct GEOINT mission tasking and mission management of Reserve Forces engaged or capable of being engaged in these activities, pursuant to DoDI 3305.07 (Reference (w)).

(19) Monitor and evaluate the performance of the DoD Components having GEOINT planning, programming, tasking, collection, processing, production, exploitation, dissemination, and retention functions in meeting national and military GEOINT requirements. Make recommendations to the DoD Components to remedy issues and take actions, as appropriate. Report evaluation results annually to the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the USD(I), the DNI, and the DDI.

(20) To the extent authorized by the DNI, evaluate the performance of USG departments and agencies of the IC having GEOINT planning, programming, tasking, collection, processing, production, exploitation, and dissemination functions in meeting National and non-National Intelligence requirements. Report evaluation results to the Secretary of Defense and the DNI.

(21) Define and effect cooperative GEOINT production and dissemination arrangements to enhance the performance of DoD and IC GEOINT-related elements.

(22) Manage the GEOINT archive of the USG and appropriate commercial, theater, and tactical imagery and geospatial data. Establish policy, guidelines, objectives, and standards for retention of GEOINT consistent with law and policy.

(23) Participate, as appropriate, in Secretary of Defense and DNI acquisition processes, consistent with DoDD 5000.01, Intelligence Community Directive (ICD) 801 (formerly ICD

105), and Secretary of Defense and DNI Memorandum of Agreement (References (x), (y), and (z)).

(24) Conduct counterintelligence activities, pursuant to DoDD O-5240.02 (Reference (aa)) and References (c) and (e). Disseminate threat information to the Defense Counterintelligence and Human Intelligence Center or other authorized DoD elements in a timely manner.

# b. GEOINT Architecture and Standards

(1) Serve as the DoD Lead for GEOINT standards and prescribe, mandate, and enforce standards and architectures related to GEOINT and GEOINT tasking, collection, processing, exploitation, and international geospatial information for the DoD Components and for the nonDoD elements of the IC, pursuant to References (a) and (b), to include:

(a) Standards for end-to-end architectures and embedded interfaces related to GEOINT. (b) Standards for geospatial aspects of natural and man-made features across the environmental domains of Earth, the atmosphere, and near-Earth space.

(c) Standards for GEOINT collected or produced within the Department of Defense. (d) Technical guidance and direction to the DoD Components and other components of the NSG regarding standardization and interoperability of systems requiring, exploiting, and/or disseminating GEOINT.

(2) Represent the Department of Defense in national and international geospatial information standardization activities.

# c. GEOINT Systems

(1) Establish end-to-end and system architectures related to GEOINT in compliance with National and Defense Information Infrastructure guidance and standards, pursuant to References (a) and (b).

(2) Develop, acquire, and field GEOINT-related systems.

(a) Perform or direct research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E), deployment, operation, and maintenance of systems, applications, and services related to GEOINT tasking, collection, processing, exploitation, dissemination, and storage.

(b) Transfer or otherwise provide such systems to the DoD Components and to other USG departments and agencies, as appropriate.

(c) Participate in DoD experiments and demonstrations to provide geospatial research and development tools to guide the advanced GEOINT capabilities of future warfare systems.

d. GEOINT Training and Education. Develop and prescribe standards for GEOINT tradecraft and career development programs, pursuant to Reference (e), as well as DoDI 3305.10, DoDD 1322.18, and DoDI 1430.04 (References (ab), (ac), and (ad)).

e. GEOINT Functional Management and Program Management

(1) Lead and provide functional management guidance to the NSG, including the issuance of doctrine, standards, policies, directives, and procedures required for GEOINT. Advise on GEOINT investment strategies and activities, including RDT&E and procurement within the MIP and NIP.

(2) Promote GEOINT collaboration, cooperation, and information sharing with other DoD Components, the IC, other USG departments and agencies, and allied and coalition partners under USD(I) and DNI guidance, as appropriate.

(3) Serve as the Program Manager for the National Geospatial Intelligence Program within the NIP and as the Component Manager for the NGA MIP, pursuant to DoDD 5205.12 (Reference (ae)).

(4) Advise the Secretary of Defense and the DNI on future needs for GEOINT capabilities and systems.

(5) Advise the Defense Acquisition Board, the Joint Requirements Oversight Council, the Defense Science Board, the Joint Space Management Board, the DNI Deputy’s Executive Committee, and other DoD boards on GEOINT, as appropriate.

(6) Issue procedures and instructions for GEOINT and related matters to the NSG, as necessary, including handbooks for exploitation and analysis as well as dissemination and release of GEOINT, consistent with DoD and ODNI guidance and policies.

(7) Support national level forums that review GEOINT strategy and international policy and assess future GEOINT capabilities.

# f. GEOINT International Engagement

(1) Establish and maintain international GEOINT agreements and arrangements with foreign governments and international organizations, pursuant to References (a) and (b) and consistent with Reference (e). Formulate international GEOINT strategies and manage GEOINT relationships with foreign governments and international organizations in coordination with the USD(I) and the DNI, and ensure these strategies and relationships conform to DoD and ODNI policy. Oversee GEOINT relationships with foreign governments, pursuant to Reference (a).

(a) Coordinate and establish international GEOINT relationships for technical support and the exchange of GEOINT data, information, technology, and resources.

(b) Report to the Secretary of Defense all GEOINT international agreements concluded by NGA in accordance with DoDD 5530.3 (Reference (af)). Further, inform the USD(I) of all other GEOINT international arrangements or engagements undertaken by NGA.

(2) Execute foreign disclosure and release responsibilities for national and commercial imagery, pursuant to DNI Memorandum (Reference (ag)).

(3) Disclose and release GEOINT-related classified military information through Top Secret, pursuant to Reference (r), to foreign mission partners to support NGA and U.S. national security requirements.

(4) Direct, support, manage, and oversee DoD and IC-related research and experiments, both foreign and domestic, related to the design, development, and future operations of GEOINT space and airborne system architectures.

(5) Prepare and execute Foreign Military Sales cases for GEOINT services and articles.

(6) Conduct Accommodation Procurements on behalf of foreign countries, pursuant to Reference (a).

g. Additional Activities. Perform additional activities and such other duties as may be directed by the President of the United States, the Secretary of Defense, the USD(I), or the DNI.

# 7. RELATIONSHIPS

a. The Director, NGA, in the performance of assigned functions and responsibilities, shall:

(1) Report directly to the USD(I), pursuant to References (c) and (e), Secretary of Defense authorities in References (a) and (b), and other applicable authorities.

(2) Report to the Secretary of Defense when operational exigencies require immediate decision. The Director, NGA, shall inform the USD(I) in a timely manner when such is imminent or has occurred.

(3) Be responsible to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for GEOINT matters affecting the responsibilities of the Chairman under Reference (a), especially requirements associated with the joint planning process and for matters affecting the missions and responsibilities of the Combatant Commanders and Secretaries of the Military Departments, pursuant to DoDD 3000.06 (Reference (ah)).

(4) Exchange information and coordinate actions and advice with the Heads of the DoD Components having collateral or related responsibilities and functions, as appropriate.

(5) Maintain communication and/or liaison with other IC and USG departments and agencies on GEOINT matters, pursuant to References (a) and (b), and other applicable authorities.

(6) Report to the DNI, pursuant to DDI responsibilities in References (c) and (f), and maintain liaison with other USG departments and agencies on GEOINT matters.

(7) Provide direct support to the DIOCC and Combatant Command-level and operational-level centers, pursuant to References (i) and (j). Inform the DIOCC and the respective operational-level centers of NGA activities occurring in each Combatant Command area of responsibility.

(8) Participate, as appropriate, in the Secretary of Defense Biennial Review of Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities in coordination with the Director of Administration and Management (DA&M).

(9) Notify the USD(I) and the General Counsel of the Department of Defense within 90 days of the issuance date when the Director, NGA, believes a DoD issuance would damage, limit, or seriously inhibit NGA from performing its missions.

(10) Support the Combatant Commanders, the Combatant Commands’ Components, and the Secretaries of the Military Departments, as appropriate.

(11) Use existing systems, facilities, and services of the Department of Defense and other USG departments and agencies, when possible, to avoid duplication and achieve maximum efficiency and economy, as well as to preserve the capability of assigned facilities and other assets to accomplish the NGA mission.

(12) Conduct all NGA activities, pursuant to DoDD 5240.01 (Reference (ai)) and DoD 5240.1-R (Reference (aj)).

b. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall review and assess NGA responsiveness and readiness to support operating forces in the event of war or threats to national security, and is authorized to communicate with and task the Director, NGA, pursuant to Reference (a) and the Unified Command Plan (Reference (ak)).

c. The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I), shall:

(1) Within existing resources, provide expertise, capabilities, and all available data and information necessary for the Director, NGA, to perform the responsibilities and functions prescribed herein.

(2) As Director, DIOCC, coordinate via Commander, USSTRATCOM, to receive Secretary of Defense approval to allocate theater or Service-assigned collection assets, when advised by the Director, NGA, that overriding national GEOINT requirements cannot otherwise be met. The Director, NGA, shall provide technical advice and direction to effect the tasking.

d. The Directors of the National Security Agency and the National Reconnaissance Office, under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(I), shall, within existing resources, provide expertise, capabilities, and all available data within authorized guidelines and information necessary for the Director, NGA, to perform the responsibilities and functions prescribed herein.

e. The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD(AT&L)) shall coordinate with the USD(I) and the GEOINT Functional Manager when new GEOINT activities or programs are proposed to ensure compliance with GEOINT standards.

f. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration/DoD Chief Information Officer shall provide guidance to the Director, NGA, regarding information sharing management in consultation and coordination with the USD(I) and DNI.

g. The Heads of the DoD Components shall:

(1) Provide assistance, support, data, and information, in their respective fields of responsibility and within available resources, to the Director, NGA, to carry out functions as assigned herein.

(2) Comply with taskings from the Director, NGA, pursuant to this Directive.

(3) Submit GEOINT production requirements to the Director, NGA, pursuant to procedures established by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

(4) Coordinate with Director, NGA, on all matters concerning the mission, capabilities, functions, and operations of the NSG.

h. The Commanders of the Combatant Commands and the Heads of the other DoD Components, as applicable, as primary collectors of theater GEOINT, shall provide NGA with ready access to theater collection plans, operations, and collected theater GEOINT in coordination with the Director, DIOCC.

i. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall:

(1) Designate Service GEOINT elements within each respective Military Department to facilitate integration of GEOINT-related activities and Military Service functions across the NSG. The element shall serve as the formal Service point of contact for all NSG planning, programming, budgeting, acquisition, technology investment, policy, doctrine, training, tradecraft, personnel, tasking, collection, process, production, exploitation, and dissemination functions related to Military Service GEOINT functions and activities.

(2) Coordinate their GEOINT plans, programs (including international plans or programs), and budgets with the Director, NGA, as the Functional Manager for GEOINT.

(3) Participate and assist in coordinating the Functional Manager evaluation of DoD Components having GEOINT-related activities and functions.

8. AUTHORITIES. The Director, NGA, is hereby delegated authority to:

a. Communicate directly with the Heads of the DoD Components, as necessary, to carry out assigned responsibilities and functions, including requests for advice and assistance. Communications to the Military Departments shall be transmitted through the Secretaries of the Military Departments, their designees, or as otherwise provided in law or as directed by the Secretary of Defense in other DoD issuances. Communications to the Combatant Commanders normally shall be transmitted through the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

b. Communicate with other Government officials, representatives of the Legislative Branch, members of the public, and representatives of foreign governments or other entities, as appropriate, in carrying out assigned responsibilities and functions. Communications with representatives of the Legislative Branch shall be coordinated with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs or the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer of the Department of Defense, as applicable, and be consistent with the DoD Legislative Program. Those issues which fall under the purview of the DNI will be coordinated with the DNI.

c. Obtain reports, information, advice, and assistance, consistent with DoDD 4630.05 (Reference (al)) and DoDI 8910.01 (Reference (am)), as necessary, to carry out assigned responsibilities and functions. Exploit and integrate lessons learned from joint and DoD organizations and warfighting analysis centers.

d. Publish guidance to the DoD Components in carrying out assigned responsibilities prescribed herein in accordance with the authorities contained in Enclosure 2.

e. Exercise functional management and oversight of the NSG, including technical oversight of NSG tactical elements, to ensure interoperability between existing and future NSG systems, connectivity between national and tactical systems, and modernization of tactical systems.

f. Coordinate with the Military Services to establish GEOINT elements within each Military Service to ensure integration of GEOINT-related activities and functions across the NSG.

g. Exercise the administrative authorities contained in Enclosure 2.

a. The Director, NGA, if a civilian, is appointed by the Secretary of Defense, after the Secretary has obtained the concurrence of the DNI as provided for in Reference (e), section 201 of Reference (a), and section 403-6 of Reference (b). The USD(I) shall make recommendations to the Secretary of Defense regarding the prospective Director.

b. The Director, NGA, if a military officer, is appointed by the President, upon recommendation of the Secretary of Defense. The Secretary must obtain the concurrence of the DNI before making such recommendation, pursuant to Reference (e), section 201 of Reference (a), and section 403-6 of Reference (b). The USD(I) shall make recommendations to the Secretary of Defense regarding the prospective nominee.

c. The Secretaries of the Military Departments shall assign military personnel to NGA, pursuant to approved Joint Manpower Program authorizations and procedures for assignment to joint duty. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall review NGA joint staffing requirements for those functions related to NGA direct-intelligence support to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and provide appropriate recommendations to the USD(I).

d. The Director, NGA, shall be authorized such personnel, facilities, funds, and other resources as the Secretary of Defense, or the DNI, as applicable, deems appropriate, to include facilities, services, and other support from the Military Departments. The Director, NGA, may obtain personnel, administrative, and contracting support from the Heads of the other DoD Components, the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, the Secretary of Homeland Security, and/or the DNI, to the extent permitted by law, including, but not limited to, Reference (c) and Public Law 104-201, “National Imagery and Mapping Agency Act of 1996” (Reference (an)).

10. RELEASABILITY. UNLIMITED. This Directive is approved for public release and is available on the Internet from the DoD Issuances Web Site at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives.

11. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective immediately.

Enclosures 1. References 2. Delegations of Authority Glossary

# ENCLOSURE 1

# REFERENCES

(s) (t) National Defense Strategy, August 5, 2008 Guidance for the Development of the Force (GDF) for FY2010-2015, May 12, 20087   
(u) DoD Instruction 5030.59, “National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) LIMITED DISTRIBUTION Geospatial Intelligence,” December 7, 2006   
(v) Executive Order 12958, “Classified National Security Information,” April 17, 1995, as amended   
(w) DoD Instruction 3305.07, “Joint Reserve Intelligence Program (JRIP),” March 27, 2007   
(x) DoD Directive 5000.01, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003   
(y) Intelligence Community Directive 801 (formerly ICD 105), “Acquisition,” August 16, 2006   
(z) Memorandum of Agreement between the Secretary of Defense and the Director of National Intelligence on the Management of Acquisition Programs Executed at the Department of Defense Intelligence Community Elements, March 25, $2 0 0 8 ^ { 5 }$   
(aa) DoD Directive O-5240.02, “Counterintelligence,” December 20, $2 0 0 7 ^ { 4 }$   
(ab) DoD Instruction 3305.10, “DoD Geospatial Intelligence (GEOINT) Training,” December 22, 2006   
(ac) DoD Directive 1322.18, “Military Training,” January 13, 2009   
(ad) DoD Instruction 1430.04, “Civilian Employee Training,” June 2, 2007   
(ae) DoD Directive 5205.12, “Military Intelligence Program (MIP),” November 14, 2008   
(af) DoD Directive 5530.3, “International Agreements,” June 11, 1987   
(ag) Director of National Intelligence Memorandum, “Implementation Plan Relating to National Classified Satellite Imagery Authorities (U),” (Executive Secretariat 00687), December 13, $2 0 0 5 ^ { 8 }$   
(ah) DoD Directive 3000.06, “Combat Support Agencies,” July 10, 2007   
(ai) DoD Directive 5240.01, “DoD Intelligence Activities,” August 27, 2007   
(aj) DoD Regulation 5240.1-R, “Procedures Governing the Activities of DoD Intelligence Components that Affect United States Persons,” December 7, 1982   
(ak) Unified Command Plan, December 17, $2 0 0 8 ^ { 9 }$   
(al) DoD Directive 4630.05, “Interoperability and Supportability of Information Technology (IT) and National Security Systems (NSS),” May 5, 2004   
(am) DoD Instruction 8910.01, “Information Collection and Reporting,” March 6, 2007   
(an) Public Law 104-201, “National Imagery and Mapping Agency Act of 1996,” September 23, 1996

# ENCLOSURE 2

# DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY

Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense, and subject to his or her authority, direction, and control, and in accordance with DoD policies and issuances, the Director, NGA, or in the absence of the Director, the person acting for the Director, is hereby delegated authority as required in the administration of NGA missions and operations to:

# a. Human Resources

(1) Exercise the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense according to sections 301, 302(b), 3101, and 5107 of title 5, U.S.C., and Chapter 83 of title 10, U.S.C., as amended, on the employment, direction, and general administration of NGA civilian personnel.

(2) Fix rates of pay for wage-rate employees exempted from the Classification Act of 1949 according to section 5102 of title 5, U.S.C., on the basis of rates established under the Federal Wage System. In fixing such rates, the Director, NGA, shall follow the wage schedule established by the DoD Wage Fixing Authority.

(3) Pursuant to the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense under section 1609 of title 10, U.S.C., terminate the employment of NGA employees. This authority may NOT be further delegated.

(4) Administer oaths of office to those entering the Executive Branch of the Federal Government or any other oath required by law in connection with employment therein, pursuant to section 2903 of title 5, U.S.C., and designate in writing, as may be necessary, officers and employees of NGA to perform this function.

(5) Carry out delegations regarding the Defense Civilian Intelligence Personnel System as prescribed in DoDD 1400.35.

(6) Establish an NGA Incentive Awards Board, pay cash awards to, and incur necessary expenses for, the honorary recognition of civilian employees of the Government whose suggestions, inventions, superior accomplishments, or other personal efforts, including special acts or services, benefit NGA, pursuant to section 4503 of title 5, U.S.C., Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulations, and DoD 1400.25.

(7) Act as agent for the collection and payment of employment taxes imposed by appropriate statutes.

(8) As necessary, use advisory committees and employ temporary or intermittent experts or consultants, as approved by the Secretary of Defense or the DA&M, in support of NGA functions consistent with section 173 of title 10, U.S.C.; section 3109(b) of title 5, U.S.C.;

Federal Advisory Committee Act, title 5, U.S.C. Appendix 2; and DoDI 5105.04 and DoDD 5105.18.

(9) Authorize and approve:

(a) Temporary duty travel for military personnel assigned or detailed to NGA, pursuant to Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume 1, “Uniformed Service Members.”

(b) Travel for NGA civilian employees, pursuant to Joint Travel Regulations, lume 2, “DoD Civilian Personnel.”

(c) Invitational travel to non-DoD personnel whose consultative, advisory, or other highly specialized technical services are required in a capacity that is directly related to or in connection with NGA activities, pursuant to section 5703 of title 5, U.S.C., and Joint Travel Regulations, Volume 2, “DoD Civilian Personnel.”

(d) Overtime work for NGA civilian employees, pursuant to chapter 55, subchapter V of title 5, U.S.C., and applicable OPM regulations.

(e) Funds available for travel by military personnel assigned or detailed to NGA for expenses incident to attendance at meetings of technical, scientific, professional, or other similar organizations in such instances when the approval of the Secretary of Defense, or designee, is required by section 412 of title 37, U.S.C., and sections 4110 and 4111 of title 5, U.S.C.

# b. Security

(1) Pursuant to E.O.s 10450, 12333, 12958, and 12968, as well as DoDD 5200.02 and DoDI 5200.01 and, as applicable, DCIDs and ICDs (such as ICD 704), and DNI regulations, as appropriate (copies of DCIDs and ICDs are available to authorized Secret Internet Protocol Router Network users at http://capco.dssc.gov/dcids_home.htm):

(a) Designate any position in NGA as a “sensitive” position.

(b) Authorize, in the case of an emergency, the temporary appointment of a person to a sensitive position in NGA for a limited period of time and for whom an appropriate background investigation has not been completed.

(c) Grant, suspend, deny, or revoke security clearances for NGA civilian personnel and NGA-sponsored contractors and consultants, pursuant to ICD 704, DoD 5200.2-R, DoDD 5220.22, and DoDD 5220.6.

(d) Administer the NGA polygraph program, pursuant to DoD policy and the DoD Polygraph and Credibility Assessment Program.

(e) Gather additional information from a subject to conduct an adjudicative review of known derogatory information when there are indications that an individual currently or

previously Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI)-cleared or SCI-eligible may no longer meet security standards.

(f) Authorize accreditation authority for SCI Facilities, pursuant to DCID 6/9.

(g) Implement a Technical Surveillance Countermeasures Program, pursuant to DoDI 5240.01, DoDI 5240.05, and ICD 702.

(h) Publish the necessary security regulations for the protection of property and places under the jurisdiction of the Director, NGA, pursuant to DoDI 5200.08.

(2) Protect the security of NGA installations, activities, property, information, and personnel by appropriate means, including the publication of necessary security regulations.

(3) Administer DoD and IC security policies and programs within NGA.

(4) Review NGA personnel and security records and conduct preliminary inquiries into suspicious activities, pursuant to DoDD O-5240.02.

(5) Establish and conduct an organic counterintelligence program that protects NGA, the Department of Defense, and U.S. national security interests, pursuant to DoDD O-5240.02.

(6) Conduct appropriate counterintelligence activities to detect, identify, assess, exploit, counter, and neutralize intelligence collection efforts, other intelligence activities, sabotage, or terrorist activities of foreign powers, organizations, or persons directed against NGA or its mission, personnel, information, material facilities, and activities.

# c. Records

(1) Maintain an official seal and attest to the authenticity of official NGA records under that seal.

(2) Develop, establish, and maintain an active and continuing Records Management Program, pursuant to section 3102 of title 44, U.S.C., and DoDD 5015.2.

# d. Publications

(1) Authorize the publication of advertisements, notices, or proposals in newspapers, magazines, or other public media, as required, for the effective administration and operation of NGA, consistent with section 3702 of title 44, U.S.C.

(2) Establish and maintain, for the functions assigned, an appropriate publications system for common supply and service regulations, instructions, and reference documents, and changes thereto, pursuant to DoDI 5025.01.

(3) Provide maps, charts, and other publications to the public at prices and under regulations that the Secretary of Defense may prescribe, under section 453 of title 10, U.S.C.

(4) Withhold from sale and public disclosure geospatial information, including maps, charts, and other geodetic products that are restricted by international agreement, that reveal sensitive sources and methods used to obtain source material for production of the geospatial information, or whose disclosure would jeopardize or interfere with ongoing military or intelligence operations, reveal military operational or contingency plans, or reveal, jeopardize, or compromise military or intelligence capabilities, pursuant to section 455 of title 10, U.S.C.

e. Acquisition/Procurement, Financial Management, and Property

(1) Enter into support and service agreements with the Military Departments, other DoD Components, and other USG departments and agencies, as required, for the effective performance of NGA responsibilities and functions.

(2) Enter into and administer contracts, directly or through a Military Department, DoD contract administration services component, or other USG departments and agencies, as appropriate, for supplies, equipment, and services required to accomplish the NGA mission. To the extent that any law or E.O. specifically limits such authority to persons at the Secretarial level of a Military Department, such authority shall be exercised by the appropriate Under Secretary of Defense or Assistant Secretary of Defense.

(3) Use the Government-Wide Commercial Purchase Card for making appropriate purchases of material and services, other than personal services, for NGA when it is determined to be more advantageous and consistent with the best interests of the Government.

(4) Lease non-excess property under the control of NGA, under terms that will promote the National Defense or that will be in the public interest, under section 2667a of title 10, U.S.C.

(5) Serve as the Designated Approving Authority for information access and automated information systems and networks across NGA and at all protection levels.

(6) Serve as the Milestone Decision Authority (MDA) for NGA programs funded wholly or in majority by funds available from the Department of Defense, including the MIP, pursuant to DoDD 5000.1 and DoDI 5000.02, when appropriately delegated by the USD(AT&L). The Director, NGA, shall exercise such delegated MDA, pursuant to delegation instructions and applicable procedures as directed by the Secretary of Defense and the USD(AT&L).

(7) Serve as the MDA for major systems funded wholly or in majority by the NIP, pursuant to section 403(9) of title 41, U.S.C. and section 403-1 of title 50, U.S.C., when appropriately delegated jointly by the Secretary of Defense and the DNI, pursuant to the Memorandum of Agreement between the DNI and the Secretary of Defense, “Management of Acquisition Programs Executed at the Department of Defense Intelligence Community Elements.” The Director, NGA, shall exercise such delegated MDA, pursuant to delegation instructions and applicable procedures as directed by the Secretary of Defense and the DNI, pursuant to ICD 801 (formerly ICD 105).

(8) Enter into personal services contracts to the extent permitted by law.

(9) Approve premium-class travel when required for the successful performance of an intelligence mission.

(10) Exercise the authority delegated to the Secretary of Defense by the Administrator of the General Services Administration on the disposal of surplus personal property for responsibilities assigned herein.

(11) Establish and maintain appropriate property accounts for NGA, appoint Boards of Survey, approve reports of survey, relieve personal liability, and drop accountability for NGA property contained in the authorized property accounts that has been lost, damaged, stolen, destroyed, or otherwise rendered unserviceable, pursuant to applicable laws and regulations.

(12) Enter into contractual instruments for commercial-type concessions, and maintain general supervision over commercial-type concessions operated in NGA facilities considered necessary to promote the health, morale, welfare, and productivity of the military members and civilian employees of NGA, pursuant to allocable non-appropriated fund regulations.

(13) Direct, administer, and provide services to foreign governments under Foreign Military Sales, pursuant to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended; the Arms Export Control Act of 1976, as amended; and DoD 5105.65-M.

(14) Exercise authorities delegated to the Department of Defense under the Arms Export Control Act and the Export Administration regulations in support of NGA missions.

(15) Accept gifts and contributions of money, property, or services for DoD programs in support of the accomplishment of NGA missions, pursuant to section 2608 of title 10, U.S.C.

(16) Exercise the authority vested in the Secretary of Defense according to section 454 of title 10, U.S.C., relating to international agreements.

f. Re-Delegation. The Director, NGA, may re-delegate these authorities, as appropriate and in writing, except as otherwise restricted in this enclosure or by law or regulation.

# GLOSSARY

# PART I. ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

DA&M DCID   
DDI   
DIOCC DoDD   
DoDI   
DNI   
Director of Administration and Management   
Director of Central Intelligence Directive   
Director of Defense Intelligence   
Defense Intelligence Operations Coordination Center   
Department of Defense Directive   
Department of Defense Instruction   
Director of National Intelligence

E.O.

Executive order

GEOINT

geospatial intelligence

IC ICD

Intelligence Community Intelligence Community Directive

MDA MIP

Milestone Decision Authority Military Intelligence Program

NIP NGA NSG

National Intelligence Program National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National System for Geospatial Intelligence

ODNI OPM

Office of the Director of National Intelligence Office of Personnel and Management

RDT&E

research, development, test, and evaluation

SCI

Sensitive Compartmented Information

U.S.C.   
USD(AT&L)   
USD(I)   
USG   
USSTRATCOM   
United States Code   
Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics   
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence   
United States Government   
United States Strategic Command

# PART II. DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise noted, these terms and their definitions are for the purpose of this Directive.

direct tasking. Authoritative tasking of systems and resources dedicated to a GEOINT collection capability to fulfill GEOINT requirements.

Functional Manager. Pursuant to E.O. 12333, Functional Managers shall report to the DNI concerning the extent of their duties as Functional Managers, and may be charged with developing and implementing strategic guidance, policies, and procedures for activities related to a specific intelligence discipline or set of intelligence activities; setting training and tradecraft standards; and ensuring coordination within and across intelligence disciplines and IC elements and with related non-intelligence activities. Functional Managers may also advise on resource management; policies and procedures; collection capabilities and gaps; intelligence processing and dissemination; technical architectures; and other issues or activities, as applicable.

GEOINT. The exploitation and analysis of imagery and geospatial information to describe, assess, and visually depict physical features and geographically referenced activities on the Earth. GEOINT consists of imagery, imagery intelligence, and geospatial information (section 467 of Reference (a)). GEOINT collection encompasses all aspects of: literal, infrared (IR), and synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery; overhead persistent infrared capabilities; and geospatial information and services. The terms imagery intelligence and advanced geospatial intelligence are encompassed within this definition of GEOINT. GEOINT includes the exploitation and analysis of electro-optical, IR, and radar imagery; and of geospatial, spectral, laser, IR, radiometric, SAR phase history, polarimetric, spatial, and temporal data. It employs all ancillary data, signature information, and fused data products, as necessary. Integrated GEOINT products may also include data and information from collateral sources.

geospatial information. Defined in sections 455(c) and 467 of Reference (a).

geospatial information and services. The collection, information extraction, storage, dissemination, and exploitation of geodetic, geomagnetic, imagery (both commercial and national source), gravimetric, aeronautical, topographic, hydrographic, littoral, cultural, and toponymic data accurately referenced to a precise location on the surface of the Earth. Geospatial services include tools that enable users to access and manipulate data, and also include instruction, training, laboratory support, and guidance for the use of geospatial data.

imagery. Defined in section 467 of Reference (a).

imagery intelligence. Defined in section 467 of Reference (a).

National Geospatial Intelligence Program. Imagery, imagery intelligence, and geospatial fiscal and personnel resources program within the NIP for which Director, NGA, is Program Manager.

NSG. The combination of technology, policies, capabilities, doctrine, activities, people, data, and organizations necessary to produce GEOINT. The NSG community consists of geospatialintelligence-related members of the IC, Military Departments, Joint Staff, Combatant Commands, and other USG departments and agencies, including the Central Intelligence Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the Department of Homeland Security, with contributions from international entities, private industry, academia, and defense or civil community service providers.